tag-fem:

# Basis Functions

The finite element method is based on the notion that a smooth function can be
approximated by a linear combination of piece-wise smooth functions (typically
piece-wise polynomials) called *basis functions*. The coefficients of the
linear combination are called *degrees of freedom (DoFs)* and are linear
functionals of the approximated function, e.g. values at interpolation points
or integrals over submanifolds of the domain. No matter the space the problem
is formulated in, H1, H(curl), H(div) or L2, or more precisely the discrete
space the problem is [weakly-formulated](fem_weak_form.md) in, there is an
infinite range of possible bases spanning the very same discrete space.

## One-Dimensional Polynomial Bases

Consider the $[0,1]$ interval on the real line and the space of real,
univariate polynomials of degree less than or equal to $n$. We distinguish
between open and closed bases. An *open* basis does *not* interpolate the
interval endpoints, whereas a *closed* basis does. If a basis is entirely
interpolatory, i.e. is a Lagrange basis, in the sense that it is entirely
composed of Lagrange interpolating polynomials, we call it a *nodal* basis and
all its associated DoFs correspond to values of the approximated function.

<center>**Cubic basis functions on [0,1]**</center>
![](img/basis-functions.pdf)

- `GaussLegendre`: open and nodal basis; the basis of order $n$ interpolates
all the quadrature points of the Gauss-Legendre quadrature rule with $n+1$
points. These points are the zeros of the Legendre polynomial of degree $n+1$.

- `OpenUniform`: open and nodal basis; the basis of order $n$ interpolates all
the quadrature points of an open Newton-Cotes quadrature rule with $n+1$
equidistant points. These points partition the $[0,1]$ interval in $n+2$
subintervals of equal length, $x_{i \in {0,...,n}} = (i+1)/(n+2)$.

- `OpenHalfUniform`: open and nodal basis; the basis of order $n$ interpolates
all the quadrature points of an open Newton-Cotes quadrature rule with $n+1$
equidistant points. These are the midpoints of $n+1$ subintervals of equal
length partitioning the $[0,1]$ interval,
$x_{i \in {0,...,n}} = (1/2+i)/(n+1)$.

- `IntegratedGLL`: open basis; the basis of order $n$ histopolates all the
subintervals in-between the quadrature points of the Gauss-Lobatto quadrature
rule with $n+2$ points. These points are the $[0,1]$ interval endpoints plus
the zeros of the first derivative of the Legendre polynomial of degree $n+1$.

- `GaussLobatto`: closed and nodal basis; the basis of order $n$ interpolates
all the quadrature points of the Gauss-Lobatto quadrature rule with $n+1$
points. These points are the $[0,1]$ interval endpoints plus the zeros of the
first derivative of the Legendre polynomial of degree $n$.

- `ClosedUniform`: closed and nodal basis; the basis of order $n$ interpolates
all the quadrature points of the closed Newton-Cotes quadrature rule with $n+1$
equidistant points. These points partition the $[0,1]$ interval in $n$
subintervals of equal length, $x_{i \in {0,...,n}} = i/n$.

- `ClosedGL`: closed and nodal basis; the basis of order $n$ interpolates the
endpoints plus the midpoints of the subintervals in-between all the quadrature
points of the Gauss-Legendre quadrature rule with $n$ points.

- `Positive`: closed basis; the basis of order $n$ is simply the Bernstein
polynomial basis of degree $n$ and only interpolates the $[0,1]$ interval
endpoints, $b_{i \in {0,...,n}}(x) = {n \choose i} x^{i}(1-x)^{n-i}$.

## Finite Element Collections and Elements of Different Types

When constructing a [finite element collection](FiniteElementCollection) for
a given order and dimension, the user can often specify one, for
[H1](H1_FECollection) and [L2](L2_FECollection) spaces, or two, for
[ND](ND_FECollection) and [RT](RT_FECollection) spaces, of the one-dimensional
bases described above. In most cases the user can simply use the provided
defaults, Gauss-Lobatto for H1 spaces, Gauss-Lobatto plus Gauss-Legendre for
ND and RT spaces, and Gauss-Lobatto for L2 spaces. This should not be confused
with the integration rule default, which remains Gauss-Legendre for all cases.

For tensor product elements, e.g. quadrilaterals or hexahedra, the basis
functions are just products of one-dimensional closed and/or open basis
functions. For simplices, e.g. triangles or tetrahedra, the process of
constructing the basis functions is slightly more involved, but can essentially
be pictured as starting from the one-dimensional bases above and extending in a
triangular lattice on the faces and in the interior, thus retaining their
property as open, closed and/or nodal. In practice, in MFEM, the basis
functions for simplices are obtained as products of a hierarchical,
one-dimensional basis of Chebyshev polynomials of the first kind. The user can
use the [`display-basis` miniapp](tools.md#display-basis) to visualize various
types of basis functions on a single mesh element of their choice.

## Some Notes on Choosing Basis Functions

Occasionally, the user might find the default basis functions are not suitable
for a given problem formulation. The following is a non-exhaustive list of
considerations to take into account when choosing what basis functions to use.

First, due to their nature, not all collections accept all function bases. For
instance, H1 spaces are continuous and thus require a basis which is
interpolatory at the element boundaries, i.e. a closed basis. On the contrary,
L2 spaces do not necessarily have DoFs at the element boundaries and can be
spanned by an open basis, or any basis in fact. If an open basis is selected
though, [extra care](fem_bc.md#discontinuous-galerkin-formulations) is needed
in order to specify Dirichlet boundary conditions.

Next, nodal basis functions are particularly simple and efficient to evaluate
due to barycentric interpolation, and to integrate, especially if the user were
to write their own assembly routines using the corresponding collocated
quadrature rule.

Finally, Low-Order-Refined (LOR) discretizations are only spectrally equivalent
to the original high-order system if using a Gauss-Lobatto basis for H1 spaces
and Gauss-Lobatto plus IntegratedGLL bases for both ND and RT spaces. Note that
if a different choice is made, MFEM issues a warning but will still proceed.

<script type="text/x-mathjax-config">MathJax.Hub.Config({TeX: {equationNumbers: {autoNumber: "all"}}, tex2jax: {inlineMath: [['$','$']]}});</script>
<script type="text/javascript" src="https://cdnjs.cloudflare.com/ajax/libs/mathjax/2.7.2/MathJax.js?config=TeX-AMS_HTML"></script>
